The mediæval pilgrim to Moscow, getting his first glimpse of the Holy
City from Salutation Hill, saw before him much the same sight as the
tourist of to-day may look upon from the same spot. Three miles away a
hill crowned with white-walled buildings, many towers, gilded domes and
spires topped with Cross-and-Crescent; outside the wall that encircles
this hill, groups of buildings, large and small; open fields,
trees--singly, in rows, clumps and thickets--separate group from group;
ever and anon above the many hued roofs reach belfries, spires,
steeples, domes and minarets innumerable. Beyond, to right and left, the
scene repeats itself until the bright coloured buildings become
indistinguishable from the masses of verdure and all merge in the haze
of the plains east and west, or the faint outline of forest to the
north.

Long ago the tremendous extent of this town, apparently without limit,
amazed strangers no less than the richness and multitude of its
buildings filled pilgrims with awe and reverence. To the tourist to-day
it is as a vision of magnificent splendour and brilliance, for seen in
the clear sunlight of a summer day Moscow has beauty and brightness no
other city possesses. Long lines of ivory whiteness capped with vivid
green or flushed with carmine and ruby; great globes of deepest blue,
patches of purple and dashes of aquamarine; many gleaming domes of gold,
glowing halos of burnished copper, dazzling points of glistening
silver--such make Moscow at sunset like part of a rainbow streaked with
lightning and thickly bedizened with great gems.

Intense colours, sharp contrasts characterise Moscow. The extravagances
of design and colouring, unconcealable even in the general prospect, are
obvious on closer inspection. The stranger arriving by railway gets no
bird's-eye view of the town; but on his way from the station in the
suburbs towards the central town sees the painted roofs, coloured walls,
pretentious pillars, cupolas with golden stars, strange towers,
fantastic gates, immense buildings, tiny cottages, magnificent spaces,
narrow winding streets; irregularities and incongruities so many that
Moscow first, and most lastingly, impresses by its _bizarrerie_.

With fuller acquaintance the diversity of style appears in keeping with
the spirit of the place, and seeming incongruities are softened, or
redeemed, by originality of design or execution. The buildings of Moscow
are multiform, but there is dissimilarity rather than contrariety; the
usual elsewhere is the unconventional here, and conformity is attained
by each being unlike all others. An early traveller wrote: "One might
imagine all the states of Europe and Asia had sent a building by way of
representation to Moscow," and in a certain sense this is still true.
But it would be incorrect to assume, therefore, that cosmopolitanism is
a dominant trait. The very reverse is the fact. Moscow is essentially
Russian, and though there is abundant evidence of borrowing from Greece,
Italy and Byzantium; from Moor, Goth and Mongol; of appropriation of
classic, mediæval and renaissance methods, the prevalent style seems to
be not exactly the combination of any so much as the outcome of all. Not
that indigenous forms are wanting, but their elemental quality is
obscured by the wondrous versatility and adaptability of the artists.
The result is as confusing as though an author in writing out his
original ideas made constant random use of different alphabets in each
word.

This method, so characteristic of Russia, is perplexing rather than
intricate, but he would be very learned or foolhardy who, acting on the
rule that to see the house is to know the inmates, if shown Moscow
should at once predicate the character of its inhabitants.

Yet more than most towns Moscow reflects the life history of its people;
whatever there is of beauty, of strength, of individuality, is the
result of human intelligence, experience and effort. No town of like
importance owes so little to nature, so much to man. And the dominant
tone is religious; religious feeling has inspired the noblest efforts,
ecclesiastical influence has conserved such oneness of purpose as Moscow
manifests. Withal there is strong individualism, both clerical and
secular.

Paradoxical as Moscow is, it is in the highest degree interesting. If no
one object can be pointed to as typical of race or period, no public
work shown as the result of persistent policy or genius of peculiar
citizenship, Moscow in its entirety demonstrates the development of a
people. Even the opposing principles of diffusion and cohesion, and the
parts they have served in the history of this race, are so unmistakably
expressed that the sight-seer, even, feels that in Moscow, most surely,
must be found the key not only to the history of Russia, but also to the
character of men who have conquered and hold the largest part of two
continents.

Moscow, the town that has cradled and nursed a mighty nation, does not
lack story; but its story comprises much of the early history of the
empire subsequently evolved, and consequently much that may be
considered foreign to the city itself must be stated if the tale is to
be complete, or even comprehensible by those to whom the ancient history
of Russia is unknown.

