"BONES"
PROLOGUE

SANDERS--C.M.G.


I

You will never know from the perusal of the Blue Book the true
inwardness of the happenings in the Ochori country in the spring of the
year of Wish. Nor all the facts associated with the disappearance of the
Rt. Hon. Joseph Blowter, Secretary of State for the Colonies.

We know (though this is not in the Blue Books) that Bosambo called
together all his petty chiefs and his headmen, from one end of the
country to the other, and assembled them squatting expectantly at the
foot of the little hillock, where sat Bosambo in his robes of office
(unauthorized but no less magnificent), their upturned faces charged
with pride and confidence, eloquent of the hold this sometime Liberian
convict had upon the wayward and fearful folk of the Ochori.

Now no man may call a palaver of all small chiefs unless he notifies the
government of his intention, for the government is jealous of
self-appointed parliaments, for when men meet together in public
conference, however innocent may be its first cause, talk invariably
drifts to war, just as when they assemble and talk in private it drifts
womanward.

And since a million and odd square miles of territory may only be
governed by a handful of ragged soldiers so long as there is no
concerted action against authority, extemporized and spontaneous
palavers are severely discouraged.

But Bosambo was too cheery and optimistic a man to doubt that his action
would incur the censorship of his lord, and, moreover, he was so filled
with his own high plans and so warm and generous at heart at the thought
of the benefits he might be conferring upon his patron that the
illegality of the meeting did not occur to him, or if it occurred was
dismissed as too preposterous for consideration.

And so there had come by the forest paths, by canoe, from fishing
villages, from far-off agricultural lands near by the great mountains,
from timber cuttings in the lower forest, higher chiefs and little
chiefs, headmen and lesser headmen, till they made a respectable crowd,
too vast for the comfort of the Ochori elders who must needs provide
them with food and lodgings.

"Noble chiefs of the Ochori," began Bosambo, and Notiki nudged his
neighbour with a sharp elbow, for Notiki was an old man of forty-three,
and thin.

"Our lord desires us to give him something," he said.

He was a bitter man this Notiki, a relative of former chiefs of the
Ochori, and now no more than over-head of four villages.

"Wa!" said his neighbour, with his shining face turned to Bosambo.

Notiki grunted but said no more.

"I have assembled you here," said Bosambo, "because I love to see you,
and because it is good that I should meet those who are in authority
under me to administer the laws which the King my master has set for
your guidance."

Word for word it was a paraphrase of an address which Sanders himself
had delivered three months ago. His audience may have forgotten the
fact, but Notiki at least recognized the plagiarism and said "Oh, ho!"
under his breath and made a scornful noise.

"Now I must go from you," said Bosambo.

There was a little chorus of dismay, but Notiki's voice did not swell
the volume.

"The King has called me to the coast, and for the space of two moons I
shall be as dead to you, though my fetish will watch you and my spirit
will walk these streets every night with big ears to listen to evil
talk, and great big eyes to see the hearts of men. Yea, from this city
to the very end of my dominions over to Kalala." His accusing eyes fixed
Notiki, and the thin man wriggled uncomfortably.

"This man is a devil," he muttered under his breath, "he hears and sees
all things."

"And if you ask me why I go," Bosambo went on, "I tell you this:
swearing you all to secrecy that this word shall not go beyond your
huts" (there were some two thousand people present to share the
mystery), "my lord Sandi has great need of me. For who of us is so wise
that he can look into the heart and understand the sorrow-call which
goes from brother to brother and from blood to blood. I say no more save
my lord desires me, and since I am the King of the Ochori, a nation
great amongst all nations, must I go down to the coast like a dog or
like the headman of a fisher-village?"

He paused dramatically, and there was a faint--a very faint--murmur
which he might interpret as an expression of his people's wish that he
should travel in a state bordering upon magnificence.

Faint indeed was that murmur, because there was a hint of taxation in
the business, a promise of levies to be extracted from an unwilling
peasantry; a suggestion of lazy men leaving the comfortable shade of
their huts to hurry perspiring in the forest that gum and rubber and
similar offerings should be laid at the complacent feet of their
overlord.

Bosambo heard the murmur and marked its horrid lack of heartiness and
was in no sense put out of countenance.

"As you say," said he approvingly, "it is proper that I should journey
to my lord and to the strange people beyond the coast--to the land where
even slaves wear trousers--carrying with me most wonderful presents that
the name of the Ochori shall be as thunder upon the waters and even
great kings shall speak in pride of you," he paused again.

Now it was a dead silence which greeted his peroration. Notably
unenthusiastic was this gathering, twiddling its toes and blandly
avoiding his eye. Two moons before he had extracted something more than
his tribute--a tribute which was the prerogative of government.

Yet then, as Notiki said under his breath, or openly, or by innuendo as
the sentiment of his company demanded, four and twenty canoes laden with
the fruits of taxation had come to the Ochori city, and five only of
those partly filled had paddled down to headquarters to carry the Ochori
tribute to the overlord of the land.

"I will bring back with me new things," said Bosambo enticingly;
"strange devil boxes, large magics which will entrance you, things that
no common man has seen, such as I and Sandi alone know in all this land.
Go now, I tell thee, to your people in this country, telling them all
that I have spoken to you, and when the moon is in a certain quarter
they will come in joy bearing presents in both hands, and these ye shall
bring to me."

"But, lord!" it was the bold Notiki who stood in protest, "what shall
happen to such of us headmen who come without gifts in our hands for
your lordship, saying 'Our people are stubborn and will give nothing'?"

"Who knows?" was all the satisfaction he got from Bosambo, with the
additional significant hint, "I shall not blame you, knowing that it is
not because of your fault but because your people do not love you, and
because they desire another chief over them. The palaver is finished."

Finished it was, so far as Bosambo was concerned. He called a council of
his headmen that night in his hut.

Bosambo made his preparations at leisure. There was much to avoid before
he took his temporary farewell of the tribe. Not the least to be counted
amongst those things to be done was the extraction, to its uttermost
possibility, of the levy which he had quite improperly instituted.

And of the things to avoid, none was more urgent or called for greater
thought than the necessity for so timing his movements that he did not
come upon Sanders or drift within the range of his visible and audible
influence.

Here fortune may have been with Bosambo, but it is more likely that he
had carefully thought out every detail of his scheme. Sanders at the
moment was collecting hut tax along the Kisai river and there was also,
as Bosambo well knew, a murder trial of great complexity waiting for his
decision at Ikan. A headman was suspected of murdering his chief wife,
and the only evidence against him was that of the under wives to whom
she displayed much hauteur and arrogance.

The people of the Ochori might be shocked at the exorbitant demands
which their lord put upon them, but they were too wise to deny him his
wishes. There had been a time in the history of the Ochori when demands
were far heavier, and made with great insolence by a people who bore the
reputation of being immensely fearful. It had come to be a by-word of
the people when they discussed their lord with greater freedom than he
could have wished, the tyranny of Bosambo was better than the tyranny of
Akasava.

Amongst the Ochori chiefs, greater and lesser, only one was conspicuous
by his failure to carry proper offerings to his lord. When all the gifts
were laid on sheets of native cloth in the great space before Bosambo's
hut, Notiki's sheet was missing and with good reason as he sent his son
to explain.

"Lord," said this youth, lank and wild, "my father has collected for you
many beautiful things, such as gum and rubber and the teeth of
elephants. Now he would have brought these and laid them at your lovely
feet, but the roads through the forest are very evil, and there have
been floods in the northern country and he cannot pass the streams. Also
the paths through the forest are thick and tangled and my father fears
for his carriers."

Bosambo looked at him, thoughtfully.

"Go back to your father, N'gobi," he said gently, "and tell him that
though there come no presents from him to me, I, his master and chief,
knowing he loves me, understand all things well."

N'gobi brightened visibly. He had been ready to bolt, understanding
something of Bosambo's dexterity with a stick and fearing that the chief
would loose upon him the vengeance his father had called down upon his
own hoary head.

"Of the evil roads I know," said Bosambo; "now this you shall say to
your father: Bosambo the chief goes away from this city and upon a long
journey; for two moons he will be away doing the business of his cousin
and friend Sandi. And when my lord Bim-bi has bitten once at the third
moon I will come back and I will visit your father. But because the
roads are bad," he went on, "and the floods come even in this dry
season," he said significantly, "and the forest is so entangled that he
cannot bring his presents, sending only the son of his wife to me, he
shall make against my coming such a road as shall be in width, the
distance between the King's hut and the hut of the King's wife; and he
shall clear from this road all there are of trees, and he shall bridge
the strong stream and dig pits for the floods. And to this end he shall
take every man of his kingdom and set them to labour, and as they work
they shall sing a song which goes:


     "We are doing Notiki's work,
     The work Notiki set us to do,
     Rather than send to the lord his King
     The presents which Bosambo demanded.


"The palaver is finished."

This is the history, or the beginning of the history, of the straight
road which cuts through the heart of the Ochori country from the edge of
the river by the cataracts, even to the mountains of the great King, a
road famous throughout Africa and imperishably associated with Bosambo's
name--this by the way.

On the first day following the tax palaver Bosambo went down the river
with four canoes, each canoe painted beautifully with camwood and gum,
and with twenty-four paddlers.

It was by a fluke that he missed Sanders. As it happened, the
Commissioner had come back to the big river to collect the evidence of
the murdered woman's brother who was a petty headman of an Isisi fishing
village. The _Zaire_ came into the river almost as the last of Bosambo's
canoes went round the bend out of sight, and since a legend existed on
the river, a legend for the inception of which Bosambo himself was
mainly responsible, that he was in some way related to Mr. Commissioner
Sanders, no man spoke of Bosambo's passing.

The chief came to headquarters on the third day after his departure from
his city. His subsequent movements are somewhat obscure, even to
Sanders, who has been at some pains to trace them.

It is known that he drew a hundred and fifty pounds in English gold from
Sanders' storekeeper--he had piled up a fairly extensive credit during
the years of his office--that he embarked with one headman and his wife
on a coasting boat due for Sierra Leone, and that from that city came a
long-winded demand in Arabic by a ragged messenger for a further
instalment of one hundred pounds. Sanders heard the news on his return
to headquarters and was a little worried.

"I wonder if the devil is going to desert his people?" he said.

Hamilton the Houssa laughed.

"He is more likely to desert his people than to desert a balance of four
hundred pounds which now stands to his credit here," he said. "Bosambo
has felt the call of civilization. I suppose he ought to have secured
your permission to leave his territory?"

"He has given his people work to keep them busy," Sanders said a little
gravely. "I have had a passionate protest from Notiki, one of his chiefs
in the north. Bosambo has set him to build a road through the forest,
and Notiki objects."

The two men were walking across the yellow parade ground past the
Houssas hut in the direction of headquarters' bungalow.

"What about your murderer?" asked Hamilton, after a while, as they
mounted the broad wooden steps which led to the bungalow stoep.

Sanders shook his head.


"Everybody lied," he said briefly. "I can do no less than send the man
to the Village. I could have hung him on clear evidence, but the lady
seemed to have been rather unpopular and the murderer quite a person to
be commended in the eyes of the public. The devil of it is," he said as
he sank into his big chair with a sigh, "that had I hanged him it would
not have been necessary to write three foolscap sheets of report. I
dislike these domestic murderers intensely--give me a ravaging brigand
with the hands of all people against him."

"You'll have one if you don't touch wood," said Hamilton seriously.

Hamilton came of Scottish stock--and the Scots are notorious prophets.


II
Now the truth may be told of Bosambo, and all his movements may be
explained by this revelation of his benevolence. In the silence of his
hut had he planned his schemes. In the dark aisles of the forests, under
starless skies when his fellow-huntsmen lay deep in the sleep which the
innocent and the barbarian alone enjoy; in drowsy moments when he sat
dispensing justice, what time litigants had droned monotonously he had
perfected his scheme.

Imagination is the first fruit of civilization and when the reverend
fathers of the coast taught Bosambo certain magics, they were also
implanting in him the ability to picture possibilities, and shape from
his knowledge of human affairs the eventual consequences of his actions.
This is imagination somewhat elaborately and clumsily defined.

To one person only had Bosambo unburdened himself of his schemes.

In the privacy of his great hut he had sat with his wife, a steaming
dish of fish between them, for however lax Bosambo might be, his wife
was an earnest follower of the Prophet and would tolerate no such
abomination as the flesh of the cloven-hoofed goat.

He had told her many things.

"Light of my heart," said he, "our lord Sandi is my father and my
mother, a giver of riches, and a plentiful provider of pence. Now it
seems to me, that though he is a just man and great, having neither fear
of his enemies nor soft words for his friends, yet the lords of his land
who live so very far away do him no honour."

"Master," said the woman quietly, "is it no honour that he should be
placed as a king over us?"

Bosambo beamed approvingly.

"Thou hast spoken the truth, oh my beloved!" said he, in the
extravagance of his admiration. "Yet I know much of the white folk, for
I have lived along this coast from Dacca to Mossomedes. Also I have
sailed to a far place called Madagascar, which is on the other side of
the world, and I know the way of white folk. Even in Benguella there is
a governor who is not so great as Sandi, and about his breast are all
manner of shining stars that glitter most beautifully in the sun, and he
wears ribbons about him and bright coloured sashes and swords." He
wagged his finger impressively. "Have I not said that he is not so great
as Sandi. When saw you my lord with stars or cross or sash or a sword?

"Also at Decca, where the Frenchi live. At certain places in the Togo,
which is Allamandi,[1] I have seen men with this same style of
ornaments, for thus it is that the white folk do honour to their kind."

[Footnote 1: Allamandi--German territory.]

He was silent a long time and his brown-eyed wife looked at him
curiously.

"Yet what can you do, my lord?" she asked. "Although you are very
powerful, and Sandi loves you, this is certain, that none will listen to
_you_ and do honour to Sandi at your word--though I do not know the ways
of the white people, yet of this I am sure."

Again Bosambo's large mouth stretched from ear to ear, and his two rows
of white teeth gleamed pleasantly.

"You are as the voice of wisdom and the very soul of cleverness," he
said, "for you speak that which is true. Yet I know ways, for I am very
cunning and wise, being a holy man and acquainted with blessed apostles
such as Paul and the blessed Peter, who had his ear cut off because a
certain dancing woman desired it. Also by magic it was put on again
because he could not hear the cocks crow. All this and similar things I
have here." He touched his forehead.

Wise woman that she was, she had made no attempt to pry into her
husband's business, but spent the days preparing for the journey, she
and the nut-brown sprawling child of immense girth, who was the apple
of Bosambo's eye.

So Bosambo had passed down the river as has been described, and four
days after he left there disappeared from the Ochori village ten
brothers in blood of his, young hunting men who had faced all forms of
death for the very love of it, and these vanished from the land and none
knew where they went save that they did not follow on their master's
trail.

Tukili, the chief of the powerful eastern island Isisi, or, as it is
contemptuously called, the N'gombi-Isisi by the riverain folk, went
hunting one day, and ill fortune led him to the border of the Ochori
country. Ill fortune was it for one Fimili, a straight maid of fourteen,
beautiful by native standard, who was in the forest searching for roots
which were notorious as a cure for "boils" which distressed her
unamiable father.

Tukili saw the girl and desired her, and that which Tukili desired he
took. She offered little opposition to being carried away to the Isisi
city when she discovered that her life would be spared, and possibly was
no worse off in the harem of Tukili than she would have been in the hut
of the poor fisherman for whom her father had designed her. A few years
before, such an incident would have passed almost unnoticed.

The Ochori were so used to being robbed of women and of goats, so meek
in their acceptance of wrongs that would have set the spears of any
other nation shining, that they would have accepted the degradation and
preserved a sense of thankfulness that the robber had limited his
raiding to one girl, and that a maid. But with the coming of Bosambo
there had arrived a new spirit in the Ochori. They had learnt their
strength, incidentally they had learnt their rights. The father of the
girl went hot-foot to his over-chief, Notiki, and covered himself with
ashes at the door of the chief's hut.

"This is a bad palaver," said Notiki, "and since Bosambo has deserted us
and is making our marrows like water that we should build him a road,
and there is none in this land whom I may call chief or who may speak
with authority, it seems by my age and by relationship to the kings of
this land, I must do that which is desirable."

So he gathered together two thousand men who were working on the road
and were very pleased indeed to carry something lighter than rocks and
felled trees, and with these spears he marched into the Isisi forest,
burning and slaying whenever he came upon a little village which offered
no opposition. Thus he took to himself the air and title of conqueror
with as little excuse as a flamboyant general ever had.

Had it occurred on the river, this warlike expedition must have
attracted the attention of Sanders. The natural roadway of the territory
is a waterway. It is only when operations are begun against the internal
tribes who inhabit the bush, and whose armies can move under the cloak
of the forest (and none wiser) that Sanders found himself at a
disadvantage.

Tukili himself heard nothing of the army that was being led against him
until it was within a day's march of his gates. Then he sallied forth
with a force skilled in warfare and practised in the hunt. The combat
lasted exactly ten minutes and all that was left of Notiki's spears made
the best of their way homeward, avoiding, as far as possible, those
villages which they had visited en route with such disastrous results to
the unfortunate inhabitants.

Now it is impossible that one conqueror shall be sunk to oblivion
without his victor claiming for himself the style of his victim. Tukili
had defeated his adversary, and Tukili was no exception to the general
rule, and from being a fairly well-disposed king, amiable--too amiable
as we have shown--and kindly, and just, he became of a sudden a menace
to all that part of Sanders' territory which lies between the French
land and the river.

It was such a situation as this as only Bosambo might deal with, and
Sanders heartily cursed his absent chief and might have cursed him with
greater fervour had he had an inkling of the mission to which Bosambo
had appointed himself.


III

His Excellency the Administrator of the period had his office at a
prosperous city of stone which we will call Koombooli, though that is
not its name.

He was a stout, florid man, patient and knowledgeable. He had been sent
to clear up the mess which two incompetent administrators made, who had
owed their position rather to the constant appearance of their friends
and patrons in the division lobbies than to their acquaintance with the
native mind, and it is eloquent of the regard in which His Excellency
was held that, although he was a Knight Commander of St. Michael and St.
George, a Companion of a Victorian Order, a Commander of the Bath, and
the son of a noble house, he was known familiarly along the coast to all
administrators, commissioners, even to the deputy inspectors, as "Bob."

Bosambo came to the presence with an inward quaking. In a sense he had
absconded from his trust, and he did not doubt that Sanders had made all
men acquainted with the suddenness and the suspicious character of his
disappearance.

And the first words of His Excellency the Administrator confirmed all
Bosambo's worst fears.

"O! chief," said Sir Robert with a little twinkle in his eye, "are you
so fearful of your people that you run away from them?"

"Mighty master," answered Bosambo, humbly, "I do not know fear, for as
your honour may have heard, I am a very brave man, fearing nothing save
my lord Sanders' displeasure."

A ghost of a smile played about the corners of Sir Robert's mouth.

"That you have earned, my friend," said he. "Now you shall tell me why
you came away secretly, also why you desired this palaver with me. And
do not lie, Bosambo," he said, "for I am he who hung three chiefs on
Gallows Hill above Grand Bassam because they spoke falsely."

This was one of the fictions which was current on the coast, and was
implicitly believed in by the native population. The truth will be
recounted at another time, but it is sufficient to say that Bosambo was
one of those who did not doubt the authenticity of the legend.

"Now I will speak to you, O my lord," he said earnestly, "and I speak by
all oaths, both the oaths of my own people----"

"Spare me the oaths of the Kroo folk," protested Sir Robert, and raised
a warning hand.

"Then by Markie and Lukie will I swear," said Bosambo, fervently; "those
fine fellows of whom Your Excellency knows. I have sat long in the
country of the Ochori, and I have ruled wisely according to my
abilities. And over me at all times was Sandi, who was a father to his
people and so beautiful of mind and countenance that when he came to us
even the dead folk would rise up to speak to him. This is a miracle,"
said Bosambo profoundly but cautiously, "which I have heard but which I
have not seen. Now this I ask you who see all things, and here is the
puzzle which I will set to your honour. If Sandi is so great and so
wise, and is so loved by the greater King, how comes it that he stays
for ever in one place, having no beautiful stars about his neck nor
wonderful ribbons around his stomach such as the great Frenchiman--and
the great Allamandi men, and even the Portuguesi men wear who are
honoured by their kings?"

It was a staggering question, and Sir Robert Sanleigh sat up and stared
at the solemn face of the man before him.

Bosambo, an unromantic figure in trousers, jacket, and shirt--he was
collarless--had thrust his hands deeply into unaccustomed pockets,
ignorant of the disrespect which such an attitude displayed, and was
staring back at the Administrator.

"O! chief," asked the puzzled Sir Robert, "this is a strange palaver you
make--who gave you these ideas?"

"Lord, none gave me this idea save my own bright mind," said Bosambo.
"Yes, many nights have I laid thinking of these things for I am just and
I have faith."

His Excellency kept his unwavering eye upon the other. He had heard of
Bosambo, knew him as an original, and at this moment was satisfied in
his own mind of the other's sincerity.

A smaller man than he, his predecessor for example, might have dismissed
the preposterous question as an impertinence and given the questioner
short shrift. But Sir Robert understood his native.

"These are things too high for me, Bosambo," he said. "What dog am I
that I should question the mind of my lords? In their wisdom they give
honour and they punish. It is written."

Bosambo nodded.

"Yet, lord," he persisted, "my own cousin who sweeps your lordship's
stables told me this morning that on the days of big palavers you also
have stars and beautiful things upon your breast, and noble ribbons
about your lordship's stomach. Now your honour shall tell me by whose
favour these things come about."

Sir Robert chuckled.

"Bosambo," he said solemnly, "they gave these things to me because I am
an old man. Now when your lord Sandi becomes old these honours also will
he receive."

He saw Bosambo's face fall and went on:

"Also much may happen that will bring Sandi to their lordships' eyes,
they who sit above us. Some great deed that he may do, some high service
he may offer to his king. All these happenings bring nobility and
honour. Now," he went on kindly, "go back to your people, remembering
that I shall think of you and of Sandi, and that I shall know that you
came because of your love for him, and that on a day which is written I
will send a book to my masters speaking well of Sandi, for his sake and
for the sake of the people who love him. The palaver is finished."

Bosambo went out of the Presence a dissatisfied man, passed through the
hall where a dozen commissioners and petty chiefs were waiting audience,
skirted the great white building and came in time to his own cousin,
who swept the stables of His Excellency the Administrator. And here, in
the coolness of the stone-walled mews, he learnt much about the
Administrator; little tit-bits of information which were unlikely to be
published in the official gazette. Also he acquired a considerable
amount of data concerning the giving of honours, and after a long
examination and cross-examination of his wearied relative he left him as
dry as a sucked orange, but happy in the possession of a new
five-shilling piece which Bosambo had magnificently pressed upon him,
and which subsequently proved to be bad.


CHAPTER XII

THE MAN WHO DID NOT SLEEP


No doubt whatever but that Lieutenant Tibbetts of the Houssas had a
pretty taste for romance. It led him to exercise certain latent powers
of imagination and to garnish his voluminous correspondence with details
of happenings which had no very solid foundation in fact.

On one occasion he had called down the heavy sarcasm of his superior
officer by a reference to lions--a reference which Hamilton's sister had
seen and, in the innocence of her heart, had referred to in a letter to
her brother.

Whereupon Bones swore to himself that he would carefully avoid
corresponding with any person who might have the remotest acquaintance
with the remotest of Hamilton's relatives.

Every mail night Captain Hamilton underwent a cross-examination which at
once baffled and annoyed him.

Picture a great room, the walls of varnished match-boarding, the bare
floor covered in patches by skins. There are twelve windows covered
with fine mesh wire and looking out to the broad verandah which runs
round the bungalow. The furniture is mainly wicker work, a table or two
bearing framed photographs (one has been cleared for the huge gramophone
which Bones has introduced to the peaceful life of headquarters). There
are no pictures on the walls save the inevitable five--Queen Victoria,
King Edward, Queen Alexandra, and in a place of honour above the door
the King and his Consort.

A great oil lamp hangs from the centre of the boarded ceiling, and under
this the big solid table at either side of which two officers write
silently and industriously, for the morrow brings the mail boat.

Silent until Bones looked up thoughtfully.

"Do you know the Gripps, of Beckstead, dear old fellow?"

"No."

"None of your people know 'em?" hopefully.

"No--how the dickens do I know?"

"Don't get chuffy, dear old chap."

Then would follow another silence, until----

"Do you happen to be acquainted with the Lomands of Fife?"

"No."

"I suppose none of your people know 'em?"

Hamilton would put down his pen, resignation on his face.

"I have never heard of the Lomands--unless you refer to the Loch
Lomonds; nor to the best of my knowledge and belief are any of my
relations in blood or in law in any way acquainted with them."

"Cheer oh!" said Bones, gratefully.

Another ten minutes, and then:

"You don't know the Adamses of Oxford, do you, sir?"

Hamilton, in the midst of his weekly report, chucked down his pen.

"No; nor the Eves of Cambridge, nor the Serpents of Eton, nor the Angels
of Harrow."

"I suppose----" began Bones.

"Nor are my relations on speaking terms with them. They don't know the
Adamses, nor the Cains, nor the Abels, nor the Moseses, nor the Noahs."

"That's all I wanted to know, sir," said an injured Bones. "There's no
need to peeve, sir."

Step by step Bones was compiling a directory of people to whom he might
write without restraint, providing he avoided mythical lion hunts and
confined himself to anecdotes which were suggestively complimentary to
himself.

Thus he wrote to one pal of his at Biggestow to the effect that he was
known to the natives as "The-Man-Who-Never-Sleeps," meaning thereby that
he was a most vigilant and relentless officer, and the recipients of
this information, fired with a sort of local patriotism, sent the
remarkable statement to the _Biggestow Herald and Observer and Hindhead
Guardian_, thereby upsetting all Bones' artful calculations.

"What the devil does 'Man-Who-Never-Sleeps' mean?" asked a puzzled
Hamilton.

"Dear old fellow," said Bones, incoherently, "don't let's discuss it ...
I can't understand how these things get into the bally papers."

"If," said Hamilton, turning the cutting over in his hand, "if they
called you 'The-Man-Who-Jaws-So-Much-That-Nobody-Can-Sleep,' I'd
understand it, or if they called you
'The-Man-Sleeps-With-His-Mouth-Open-Emitting-Hideous-Noises,' I could
understand it."

"The fact is, sir," said Bones, in a moment of inspiration, "I'm an
awfully light sleeper--in fact, sir, I'm one of those chaps who can get
along with a couple of hours' sleep--I can sleep anywhere at any
time--dear old Wellin'ton was similarly gifted--in fact, sir, there are
one or two points of resemblance between Wellington and I, which you
might have noticed, sir."

"Speak no ill of the dead," reproved Hamilton; "beyond your eccentric
noses I see no points of resemblance."

It was on a morning following the dispatch of the mail that Hamilton
took a turn along the firm sands to settle in his mind the problem of a
certain Middle Island.

Middle Islands, that is to say the innumerable patches of land which
sprinkle the river in its broad places, were a never-ending problem to
Sanders and his successor. Upon these Middle Islands the dead were laid
to rest--from the river you saw the graves with fluttering ragged flags
of white cloth planted about them--and the right of burial was a matter
of dispute when the mainland at one side of the river was Isisi land,
and Akasava the other. Also some of the larger Middle Islands were
colonized.

Hamilton had news of a coming palaver in relation to one of these.

Now, on the river, it is customary for all who desire inter-tribal
palavers to announce their intention loudly and insistently. And if
Sanders had no objection he made no move, if he did not think the
palaver desirable he stopped it. It was a simple arrangement, and it
worked.

Hamilton came back from his four-mile constitutional satisfied in his
mind that the palaver should be held. Moreover, they had, on this
occasion, asked permission. He could grant this with an easy mind, being
due in the neighbourhood of the disputed territory in the course of a
week.

It seemed that an Isisi fisherman had been spearing in Akasava waters,
and had, moreover, settled, he and his family to the number of forty, on
Akasava territory. Whereupon an Akasava fishing community, whose rights
the intruder had violated, rose up in its wrath and beat Issmeri with
sticks.

Then the king of the Isisi sent a messenger to the king of Akasava
begging him to stay his hand "against my lawful people, for know this,
Iberi, that I have a thousand spears and young men eager for fire."

And Iberi replied with marked unpleasantness that there were in the
Akasava territory two thousand spears no less inclined to slaughter.

In a moment of admirable moderation, significant of the change which Mr.
Commissioner Sanders had wrought in these warlike peoples, they accepted
Hamilton's suggestion--sent by special envoy--and held a "small
palaver," agreeing that the question of the disputed fishing ground
should be settled by a third person.

And they chose Bosambo, paramount and magnificent chief of the Ochori,
as arbitrator. Now, it was singularly unfortunate that the question was
ever debatable. And yet it was, for the fishing ground in question was
off one of the many Middle Islands. In this case the island was occupied
by Akasava fishermen on the one shore and by the intruding Isisi on the
other. If you can imagine a big "Y" and over it a little "o" and over
that again an inverted "Y" thus "+" and drawing this you prolong the
four prongs of the Y's, you have a rough idea of the topography of the
place. To the left of the lower "Y" mark the word "Isisi," to the right
the word "Akasava" until you reach a place where the two right hand
prongs meet, and here you draw a line and call all above it "Ochori."
The "o" in the centre is the middle island--set in a shallow lake
through which the river (the stalk, of the Y's) runs.

Bosambo came down in state with ten canoes filled with counsellors and
bodyguard. He camped on the disputed ground, and was met thereon by the
chiefs affected.

"O, Iberi and T'lingi!" said he, as he stepped ashore, "I come in peace,
bringing all my wonderful counsellors, that I may make you as brothers,
for as you know I have a white man's way of knowing all their magic, and
being a brother in blood to our Lord Tibbetti, Moon-in-the-Eye."

"This we know, Bosambo," said Iberi, looking askance at the size of
Bosambo's retinue, "and my stomach is proud that you bring so vast an
army of high men to us, for I see that you have brought rich food for
them."

He saw nothing of the sort, but he wanted things made plain at the
beginning.

"Lord Iberi," said Bosambo, loftily, "I bring no food, for that would
have been shameful, and men would have said: 'Iberi is a mean man who
starves the guests of his house.' But only one half of my wise people
shall sit in your huts, Iberi, and the other half will rest with T'lingi
of the Akasava, and feed according to law. And behold, chiefs and
headmen, I am a very just man not to be turned this way or that by the
giving of gifts or by kindness shown to my people. Yet my heart is so
human and so filled with tenderness for my people, that I ask you not to
feed them too richly or give them presents of beauty, lest my noble mind
be influenced."

Whereupon his forces were divided, and each chief ransacked his land for
delicacies to feed them.

It was a long palaver--too long for the chiefs.

Was the island Akasava or Isisi? Old men of either nation testified with
oaths and swearings of death and other high matters that it was both.

From dawn to sunset Bosambo sat in the thatched palaver house, and on
either side of him was a brass pot into which he tossed from time to
time a grain of corn.

And every grain stood for a successful argument in favour of one or the
other of the contestants--the pot to the right being for the Akasava,
and that to the left for the Isisi.

And the night was given up to festivity, to the dancing of girls and the
telling of stories and other noble exercises.

On the tenth day Iberi met T'lingi secretly.

"T'lingi," said Iberi, "it seems to me that this island is not worth the
keeping if we have to feast this thief Bosambo and search our lands for
his pleasure."

"Lord Iberi," agreed his rival, "that is also in my mind--let us go to
this robber of our food and say the palaver shall finish to-morrow, for
I do not care whether the island is yours or mine if we can send Bosambo
back to his land."

"You speak my mind," said Iberi, and on the morrow they were blunt to
the point of rudeness.

Whereupon Bosambo delivered judgment.

"Many stories have been told," said he, "also many lies, and in my
wisdom I cannot tell which is lie and which is truth. Moreover, the
grains of corn are equal in each pot. Now, this I say, in the name of
my uncle Sandi, and my brother Tibbetti (who is secretly married to my
sister's cousin), that neither Akasava nor Isisi shall sit in this
island for a hundred years."

"Lord, you are wise," said the Akasava chief, well satisfied, and Iberi
was no less cheered, but asked: "Who shall keep this island free from
Akasava or Isisi? For men may come and there will be other palavers and
perhaps fighting?"

"That I have thought of," said Bosambo, "and so I will raise a village
of my own people on this island, and put a guard of a hundred men--all
this I will do because I love you both--the palaver is finished."

He rose in his stately way, and with his drums beating and the bright
spearheads of his young men a-glitter in the evening sunlight, embarked
in his ten canoes, having expanded his territory without loss to himself
like the Imperialist he was.

For two days the chiefs of the Akasava and the Isisi were satisfied with
the justice of an award which robbed them both without giving an
advantage to either. Then an uneasy realization of their loss dawned
upon them. Then followed a swift exchange of messages and Bosambo's
colonization scheme was unpleasantly checked.

Hamilton was on the little lake which is at the end of the N'gini River
when he heard of the trouble, and from the high hills at the far end of
the lake sent a helio message staring and blinking across the waste.

Bones, fishing in the river below Ikan, picked up the instructions, and
went flying up the river as fast as the new naphtha launch could carry
him.

He arrived in time to cover the shattered remnants of Bosambo's fleet as
they were being swept northward from whence they came.

Bones went inshore to the island, the water jacket of a Maxim gun
exposed over the bow, but there was no opposition.

"What the dooce is all this about--hey?" demanded Lieutenant Tibbetts
fiercely, and Iberi, doubly uneasy at the sound of an unaccustomed
language, stood on one leg in his embarrassment.

"Lord, the thief Bosambo----" he began, and told the story.

"Lord," he concluded humbly, "I say all this though Bosambo is your
relation since you have secretly married his sister's cousin."

Whereupon Bones went very red and stammered and spluttered in such a way
that the chief knew for sure that Bosambo had spoken the truth.

Bones, as I have said before, was no fool. He confirmed Bosambo's order
for the evacuation of the island, but left a Houssa guard to hold it.

Then he hurried north to the Ochori.

Bosambo formed his royal procession, but there was no occasion for it,
for Bones was in no processional mood.

"What the dooce do you mean, sir?" demanded a glaring and threatening
Bones, his helmet over his neck, his arms akimbo. "What do you mean,
sir, by saying I'm married to your infernal aunt?"

"Sah," said Bosambo, virtuous and innocent, "I no savvy you--I no
compreney, sah! You lib for my house--I give you fine t'ings. I make um
moosic, sah----"

"You're a jolly old rotter, Bosambo!" said Bones, shaking his finger in
the chief's face. "I could punish you awfully for telling wicked
stories, Bosambo. I'm disgusted with you, I am indeed."

"Lord who never sleeps," began Bosambo, humbly.

"Hey?"

Bones stared at the other in amazement, suspicion, hope, and
gratification in his face.

"O, Bosambo," said he mildly, and speaking in the native tongue, "why do
you call me by that name?"

Now, Bosambo in his innocence had used a phrase (_M'wani-m'wani_) which
signifies "the sleepless one," and also stands in the vernacular for
"busy-body," or one who is eternally concerned with other people's
business.

"Lord," said Bosambo, hastily, "by this name are you known from the
mountains to the sea. Thus all men speak of you, saying: 'This is he who
does not sleep but watches all the time.'"

Bones was impressed, he was flattered, and he ran his finger between the
collar of his uniform jacket and his scraggy neck as one will do who is
embarrassed by praise and would appear unconcerned under the ordeal.

"So men call me, Bosambo," said he carelessly "though my lord M'ilitani
does not know this--therefore in the day when M'ilitani comes, speak of
me as _M'wani-m'wani_ that he may know of whom men speak when they say
'the sleepless one.'"

Everybody knows that _Cala cala_ great chiefs had stored against the
hour of their need certain stocks of ivory.

Dead ivory it is called because it had been so long cut, but good cow
ivory, closer in grain than the bull elephant brought to the hunter,
more turnable, and of greater value.

There is no middle island on the river about which some legend or buried
treasure does not float.

Hamilton, hurrying forward to the support of his second-in-command,
stopped long enough to interview two sulky chiefs.

"What palaver is this?" he demanded of Iberi, "that you carry your
spears to a killing? For is not the river big enough for all, and are
there no burying-places for your old men that you should fight so
fiercely?"

"Lord," confessed Iberi, "upon that island is a treasure which has been
hidden from the beginning of time, and that is the truth--N'Yango!"

Now, no man swears by his mother unless he is speaking straightly, and
Hamilton understood.

"Never have I spoken of this to the Chief of the Isisi," Iberi went on,
"nor he to me, yet we know because of certain wise sayings that the
treasure stays and young men of our houses have searched very diligently
though secretly. Also Bosambo knows, for he is a cunning man, and when
we found he had put his warriors to the seeking we fought him, lord, for
though the treasure may be Isisi or Akasava, of this I am sure it is not
of the Ochori."

Hamilton came to the Ochori city to find a red-eyed Bones stalking
majestically up and down the beach.

"What is the matter with you?" demanded Hamilton. "Fever?"

"Not at all," replied Bones, huskily; but with a fine carelessness.

"You look as if you hadn't had a sleep for months," said Hamilton.

Bones shrugged his shoulders.

"Dear old fellow," said he, "it isn't for nothing that I'm called 'the
sleepless one'--don't make sceptical noises, dear old officer, but
pursue your inquiries among the indigenous natives, especially
Bosambo--an hour is all I want--just a bit of a snooze and a bath and
I'm bright an' vigilant."

"Take your hour," said Hamilton briefly. "You'll need it."

His interview with Bosambo was short and, for Bosambo, painful.
Nevertheless he unbent in the end to give the chief a job after his
heart.

Launch and steamer turned their noses down the stream, and at sunset
came to the island. In the morning, Hamilton conducted a search which
extended from shore to shore and he came upon the cairn unexpectedly
after a two hours' search. He uncovered two tons of ivory, wrapped in
rotten native cloth.

"There will be trouble over this," he said, thoughtfully, surveying the
yellow tusks. "I'll go downstream to the Isisi and collect information,
unless these beggars can establish their claim we will bag this lot for
government."

He left Bones and one orderly on the island.

"I shall be gone two days," he said. "I must send the launch to bring
Iberi to me; keep your eyes peeled."

"Sir," said Bones, blinking and suppressing a yawn with difficulty, "you
can trust the sleepless one."

He had his tent pitched before the cairn, and in the shade of a great
gum he seated himself in his canvas chair.... He looked up and struggled
to his feet. He was half dead with weariness, for the whole of the
previous night, while Bosambo snored in his hut, Bones, pinching
himself, had wandered up and down the street of the city qualifying for
his title.

Now, as he rose unsteadily to his feet, it was to confront
Bosambo--Bosambo with four canoes grounded on the sandy beach of the
island.

"Hello, Bosambo!" yawned Bones.

"O Sleepless One," said Bosambo humbly, "though I came in silence yet
you heard me, and your bright eyes saw me in the little-light."

"Little-light" it was, for the sun had gone down.

"Go now, Bosambo," said Bones, "for it is not lawful that you should be
here."

He looked around for Ahmet, his orderly, but Ahmet was snoring like a
pig.

"Lord, that I know," said Bosambo, "yet I came because my heart is sad
and I have sorrow in my stomach. For did I not say that you had married
my aunt?"

"Now listen whilst I tell you the full story of my wickedness, and of my
aunt who married a white lord----"

Bones sat down in his chair and laid back his head, listening with
closed eyes.

"My aunt, O Sleepless One," began Bosambo, and Bones heard the story in
fragments. "... Coast woman ... great lord ... fine drier of cloth...."

Bosambo droned on in a monotonous tone, and Bones, open-mouthed, his
head rolling from side to side, breathed regularly.

At a gesture from Bosambo, the man who sat in the canoe slipped lightly
ashore. Bosambo pointed to the cairn, but he himself did not move, nor
did he check his fluent narrative.

Working with feverish, fervent energy, the men of Bosambo's party loaded
the great tusks in the canoes. At last all the work was finished and
Bosambo rose.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wake up, Bones."

Lieutenant Tibbetts stumbled to his feet glaring and grimacing wildly.

"Parade all correct, sir," he said, "the mail boat has just come in, an'
there's a jolly old salmon for supper."

"Wake up, you dreaming devil," said Hamilton.

Bones looked around. In the bright moonlight he saw the _Zaire_ moored
to the shelving beach, saw Hamilton, and turned his head to the empty
cairn.

"Good Lord!" he gasped.

"O Sleepless One!" said Hamilton softly, "O bright eyes!"

Bones went blundering to the cairn, made a closer inspection, and came
slowly back.

"There's only one thing for me to do, sir," he said, saluting. "As an
officer an' a gentleman, I must blow my brains out."

"Brains!" said Hamilton scornfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

"As a matter of fact I sent Bosambo to collect the ivory which I shall
divide amongst the three chiefs--it's perished ivory, anyhow; and he had
my written authority to take it, but being a born thief he preferred to
steal it; you'll find it stacked in your cabin, Bones."

"In my cabin, sir!" said an indignant Bones; "there isn't room in my
cabin, sir. How the dickens am I going to sleep?"


                    THE END



INDEX

 POPULAR NOVELS

 BY

 EDGAR WALLACE

 PUBLISHED BY

 WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED.

 _In Various Editions_.

 SANDERS OF THE RIVER
 BONES
 BOSAMBO OF THE RIVER
 BONES IN LONDON
 THE KEEPERS OF THE KING'S PEACE
 THE COUNCIL OF JUSTICE
 THE DUKE IN THE SUBURBS
 THE PEOPLE OF THE RIVER
 DOWN UNDER DONOVAN
 PRIVATE SELBY
 THE ADMIRABLE CARFEW
 THE MAN WHO BOUGHT LONDON
 THE JUST MEN OF CORDOVA
 THE SECRET HOUSE
 KATE, PLUS TEN
 LIEUTENANT BONES
 THE ADVENTURES OF HEINE
 JACK O' JUDGMENT
 THE DAFFODIL MYSTERY
 THE NINE BEARS
 THE BOOK OF ALL POWER
 MR. JUSTICE MAXELL
 THE BOOKS OF BART
 THE DARK EYES OF LONDON
 CHICK
 SANDI, THE KING-MAKER
 THE THREE OAK MYSTERY
 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE FROG
 BLUE HAND
 GREY TIMOTHY
 A DEBT DISCHARGED
 THOSE FOLK OF BULBORO'
 THE MAN WHO WAS NOBODY
 THE GREEN RUST
 THE FOURTH PLAGUE
 THE RIVER OF STARS

 _Made and Printed in Great Britain by_
 WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED, LONDON.

 TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

Every effort has been made to remain true to the original text; minor
changes have been made to regularize spelling and hyphenation within the
book. The _ character has been used to indicate that the enclosed
word(s) were originally typeset as italic font; on line 7136, where an
inverted "Y" was present in the original text, this character has been
replaced with a "+".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bones, by Edgar Wallace

