Chapter 1
A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY
When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly be celebrating his eleventy-first
birthday with a party of special magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.
Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the Shire for sixty years, ever
since his remarkable disappearance and unexpected return. The riches he had brought back from his
travels had now become a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk might
say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with treasure. And if that was not enough for
fame, there was also his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemed to have little
effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they began to call
him well-preserved; but unchanged would have been nearer the mark. There were some that shook
their heads and thought this was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess
(apparently) perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and trouble will come of it!’
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with his money, most people
were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his
relatives (except, of course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among the
hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until some of his younger
cousins began to grow up.
The eldest of these, and Bilbo’s favourite, was young Frodo Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine
he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-
Bagginses were finally dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September
22nd. ‘You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,’ said Bilbo one day; ‘and then we can
celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the
hobbits called the irresponsible twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively combined birthdayparties
at Bag End; but now it was understood that something quite exceptional was being planned for
that autumn. Bilbo was going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number, and a very
respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); and Frodo was going to be
thirty-three, 33, an important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming event travelled all
over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once again the chief topic of
conversation; and the older folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He
held forth at The Ivy Bush, a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he
had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his
youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo.
They lived on the Hill itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve always said,’ the Gaffer declared.
With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and consulting him
constantly upon the growing of vegetables – in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer
was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood (including himself).
‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old Noakes of Bywater. ‘Baggins is his
name, but he’s more than half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton
should go looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.’
‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they
live on the wrong side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. That’s a dark bad
place, if half the tales be true.’
‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not that the Brandybucks of Buckland live in the Old Forest;
but they’re a queer breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big river – and that isn’t
natural. Small wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a
young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all
his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much
to tell of him, till he was drownded.’
‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and other darker rumours before, of course;
but hobbits have a passion for family history, and they were ready to hear it again.
‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss Primula
Brandybuck. She was our Mr. Bilbo’s first cousin on the mother’s side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr. Frodo is his first and
second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was
staying at Brandy Hall with his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage
(him being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out
boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a
child and all.’
‘I’ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was
Drogo’s weight as sunk the boat.’
‘And I heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after him,’ said Sandyman, the Hobbiton
miller.
‘You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the Gaffer, who did not much like the
miller. ‘There isn’t no call to go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for
those that sit still without looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo
left an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up
anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer
than a couple of hundred relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.
‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They thought they were going to
get Bag End, that time when he went off and was thought to be dead. And then he comes back and
orders them off; and he goes on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And
suddenly he produces an heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t
never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’
‘There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,’ said a stranger, a visitor on
business from Michel Delving in the Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed
with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I’ve heard.’
‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered the Gaffer. ‘I know nothing about jools.
Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making. I saw
Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I’d not long come
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad’s cousin), but he had me up at Bag End helping him to keep
folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it
all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don’t
doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign parts, where there be mountains of
gold, they say; but there wasn’t enough to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that.
He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days, he is, and he listens to all Mr.
Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters – meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm
will come of it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are better for me and you. Don’t go
getting mixed up in the business of your betters, or you’ll land in trouble too big for you, I says to
him. And I might say it to others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo’s wealth was now too firmly
fixed in the minds of the younger generation of hobbits.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,’ argued the miller, voicing
common opinion. ‘He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish folk that visit him:
dwarves coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you
like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you do of boating, Mr.
Sandyman,’ retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s being queer, then
we could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not far away that wouldn’t offer a
pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag
End. Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents,
mark you, presents for all – this very month as is.’
That very month was September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or two later a rumour
(probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were going to be fireworks
– fireworks, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed
since the Old Took died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden with odd-looking packages
rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of
lamplit doors to gape at it. It was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in
September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandywine Bridge in broad
daylight. An old man was driving it all alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and
a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond the brim of his
hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo
of fireworks, as they rightly guessed. At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload: there were
great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red G and the elf-rune,
.
That was Gandalf’s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the
Shire was due mainly to his skill with fires, smokes, and lights. His real business was far more
difficult and dangerous, but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the
‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted,
and the old man smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally
and never stopped long; but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his
firework displays – they now belonged to a legendary past.
When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finished unloading, Bilbo gave a few
pennies away; but not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the
onlookers.
‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when the time comes.’ Then he disappeared
inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while,
and then made off, feeling that the day of the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a small room looking out
west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and
golden: snapdragons and sunflowers, and nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at
the round windows.
‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf.
‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old Shire; but I think I need a
holiday.’
‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’
‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t changed it.’
‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan – your whole plan, mind – and I hope
it will turn out for the best, for you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have my little joke.’
‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head.
‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo.
The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There might have been some
grumbling about ‘dealing locally’, but that very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every
kind of provision, commodity, or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere
in the neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the days on the calendar;
and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton post-office was blocked, and the
Bywater post-office was snowed under, and voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a
constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, I shall
certainly come.
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT ON PARTY BUSINESS. Even those
who had, or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing
invitations, ticking off answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his
own. From the time of Gandalf’s arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo’s front door, covered with
ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road,
and wide steps and a large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even
pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the
field was right inside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were
hung on all its branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormous open-air kitchen
was erected in the north corner of the field. A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for
miles around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End.
Excitement rose to its height.
Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense.
Then Thursday, September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags
were unfurled and the fun began.
Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of entertainments rolled into one.
Practically everybody living near was invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they
turned up all the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts of the Shire were also asked;
and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and additions) at the new
white gate in person. He gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter were those who went out
again by a back way and came in again by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their
own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was
not a bad system. Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year was somebody’s birthday,
so that every hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present at least once a week. But
they never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-children were so excited that for a
while they almost forgot about eating. There were toys the like of which they had never seen before,
all beautiful and some obviously magical. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, and
had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.
When every guest had been welcomed and was finally inside the gate, there were songs, dances,
music, games, and, of course, food and drink. There were three official meals: lunch, tea, and dinner
(or supper). But lunch and tea were marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the guests were
sitting down and eating together. At other times there were merely lots of people eating and drinking –
continuously from elevenses until six-thirty, when the fireworks started.
The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by him, but designed and made by
him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights of rockets were let off by him. But there was also a
generous distribution of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, elffountains,
goblin-barkers and thunderclaps. They were all superb. The art of Gandalf improved with
age. There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with sweet voices. There were green
trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and
their shining branches dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with
a sweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There were fountains of butterflies that
flew glittering into the trees; there were pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or
sailing ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain;
there was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army,
and came down again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was also one
last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The
lights went out. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began
to glow at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red-golden dragon – not lifesize,
but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he
whizzed three times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces.
The dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over Bywater with a
deafening explosion.
‘That is the signal for supper!’ said Bilbo. The pain and alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate
hobbits leaped to their feet. There was a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except
those invited to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with the tree. The
invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called by the hobbits one Gross, though the
word was not considered proper to use of people); and the guests were selected from all the families
to which Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends (such as
Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by parental permission; for hobbits were
easy-going with their children in the matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of
getting them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and Brandybucks; there were
various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins’ grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his
Took grandfather); and a selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly connected with Bilbo, and some
had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-
Bagginses were not forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in golden ink, that they had felt it
was impossible to refuse. Besides, their cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years
and his table had a high reputation.
All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast; though they rather dreaded the
after-dinner speech of their host (an inevitable item). He was liable to drag in bits of what he called
poetry; and sometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures of his mysterious
journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing
entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase of provisions fell almost to
nothing throughout the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo’s catering had depleted the stocks of
most of the stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not matter much.
After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of the company were, however, now in a
tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they called ‘filling up the corners’. They were sipping
their favourite drinks, and nibbling at their favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. They
were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.
My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ‘Hear! Hear! Hear!’ they shouted, and kept on
repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant to follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and
stood on a chair under the illuminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face; the
golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could all see him standing, waving one
hand in the air, the other was in his trouser-pocket.
My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my dear Tooks and Brandybucks, and
Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies,
Brockhouses and Proudfoots. ‘ProudFEET!’ shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion.
His name, of course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally furry, and
both were on the table.
Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I welcome back at last to
Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventh birthday: I am eleventy-one today! ‘Hurray!
Hurray! Many Happy Returns!’ they shouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was
doing splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.
I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deafening cheers. Cries of Yes (and No).
Noises of trumpets and horns, pipes and flutes, and other musical instruments. There were, as has
been said, many young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of them
bore the mark DALE on them; which did not convey much to most of the hobbits, but they all agreed
they were marvellous crackers. They contained instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting
tones. Indeed, in one corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up an impromptu orchestra,
and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and
with bells in their hands began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.
But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster nearby, he blew three loud hoots. The
noise subsided. I shall not keep you long, he cried. Cheers from all the assembly. I have called you
all together for a Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There was
almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.
Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am immensely fond of you all, and
that eleventy-one years is too short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits.
Tremendous outburst of approval.
I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less than half of you half as
well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather difficult. There was some scattered clapping,
but most of them were trying to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.
Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should say: OUR birthday. For it is, of
course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew, Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance
today. Some perfunctory clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old
Frodo,’ from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what was meant by
‘coming into his inheritance’.
Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this
remarkable total: One Gross, if I may use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of
the guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure they had only been
asked to fill up the required number, like goods in a package. ‘One Gross, indeed! Vulgar
expression.’
It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary of my arrival by
barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory
on that occasion. I was only fifty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet
was very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and could only say
‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank you very much for coming to my little
party. Obstinate silence. They all feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and they were
getting bored. Why couldn’t he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo did not sing or
recite. He paused for a moment.
Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. He spoke this last word so
loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. I regret to announce that – though, as I
said, eleventy-one years is far too short a time to spend among you – this is the END. I am going. I
am leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and the guests all blinked.
When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty-four
flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless. Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and
stamped. Then there was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins,
Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody,
Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.
It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more food and drink were needed
to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. ‘He’s mad. I always said so,’was probably the most
popular comment. Even the Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. For
the moment most of them took it for granted that his disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous
prank.
But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor an enormous dinner had clouded his
wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda: ‘There’s something fishy in this, my dear! I
believe that mad Baggins is off again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn’t taken the vittles with
him.’ He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.
Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he had sat silent beside
Bilbo’s empty chair, and ignored all remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even
though he had been in the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surprise of
the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he realized suddenly that he loved the old
hobbit dearly. Most of the guests went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins’ oddities,
past and present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo did not want to
have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more wine to be served; then he got up and
drained his own glass silently to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.
As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had been fingering the golden ring
in his pocket: his magic ring that he had kept secret for so many years. As he stepped down he slipped
it on his finger, and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again.
He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment listening with a smile to the din in the
pavilion, and to the sounds of merrymaking in other parts of the field. Then he went in. He took off his
party clothes, folded up and wrapped in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and put it away.
Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, and fastened round his waist a worn leather belt.
On it he hung a short sword in a battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if they were very
precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that their original colour could hardly be
guessed: it might have been dark green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his
study, and from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a leather-bound
manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy
bag that was standing there, already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put it on the mantelpiece, but
suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came
quickly in.
‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’
‘I am glad to find you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting down in a chair, ‘I wanted to catch you
and have a few final words. I suppose you feel that everything has gone off splendidly and according
to plan?’
‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. ‘Though that flash was surprising: it quite startled me, let alone the others.
A little addition of your own, I suppose?’
‘It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, and it seemed to me necessary to
give your guests something else that would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’
‘And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,’ laughed Bilbo, ‘but I expect you
know best, as usual.’
‘I do – when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure about this whole affair. It has now come to
the final point. You have had your joke, and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the
whole Shire something to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are you going any
further?’
‘Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as I have told you before. Probably a
permanent holiday: I don’t expect I shall return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I have made all
arrangements.
‘I am old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning to feel it in my heart of hearts. Wellpreserved
indeed!’ he snorted. ‘Why, I feel all thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like
butter that has been scraped over too much bread. That can’t be right. I need a change, or something.’
Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does not seem right,’ he said thoughtfully.
‘No, after all I believe your plan is probably the best.’
‘Well, I’ve made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains again, Gandalf – mountains; and
then find somewhere where I can rest. In peace and quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around,
and a string of confounded visitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my
book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived happily ever after to the end of his days.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however it ends.’
‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as it has gone. You’ll keep
an eye on Frodo, won’t you?’
‘Yes, I will – two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’
‘He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he offered to once, just before the
party. But he does not really want to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before I die, and the
Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He ought to
be comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, except a few oddments. I hope he will
be happy, when he gets used to being on his own. It’s time he was his own master now.’
‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. ‘The ring as well? You agreed to that, you remember.’
‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo.
‘Where is it?’
‘In an envelope, if you must know,’ said Bilbo impatiently. ‘There on the mantelpiece. Well, no!
Here it is in my pocket!’ He hesitated. ‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softly to himself. ‘Yet after all,
why not? Why shouldn’t it stay there?’
Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his eyes. ‘I think, Bilbo,’ he
said quietly, ‘I should leave it behind. Don’t you want to?’
‘Well yes – and no. Now it comes to it, I don’t like parting with it at all, I may say. And I don’t
really see why I should. Why do you want me to?’ he asked, and a curious change came over his
voice. It was sharp with suspicion and annoyance. ‘You are always badgering me about my ring; but
you have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.’
‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the truth. It was important. Magic rings are
– well, magical; and they are rare and curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may
say; and I still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think you have
had it quite long enough. You won’t need it any more, Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.’
Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he
cried. ‘And what business is it of yours, anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my
own. I found it. It came to me.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no need to get angry.’
‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you. My own. My Precious. Yes, my
Precious.’
The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only a flicker in his deep eyes showed that he
was startled and indeed alarmed. ‘It has been called that before,’ he said, ‘but not by you.’
‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It’s not his now, but mine.
And I shall keep it, I say.’
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if you do, Bilbo,’ he said. ‘You make that
clearer with every word you say. It has got far too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go
yourself, and be free.’
‘I’ll do as I choose and go as I please,’ said Bilbo obstinately.
‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long life we have been friends, and you owe
me something. Come! Do as you promised: give it up!’
‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo. ‘But you won’t get it. I won’t give my
Precious away, I tell you.’ His hand strayed to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf’s eyes flashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry soon,’ he said. ‘If you say that again, I
shall. Then you will see Gandalf the Grey uncloaked.’ He took a step towards the hobbit, and he
seemed to grow tall and menacing; his shadow filled the little room.
Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at his pocket. They stood for a
while facing one another, and the air of the room tingled. Gandalf’s eyes remained bent on the hobbit.
Slowly his hands relaxed, and he began to tremble.
‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You have never been like this before.
What is it all about? It is mine isn’t it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn’t kept it.
I’m not a thief, whatever he said.’
‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I am not one either. I am not trying to rob
you, but to help you. I wish you would trust me, as you used.’ He turned away, and the shadow
passed. He seemed to dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said. ‘But I felt so queer. And yet it would be
a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any more. It has been so growing on my mind lately.
Sometimes I have felt it was like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and
disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it
up, but I found I couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why. And I don’t seem able to
make up my mind.’
‘Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go away and leave it behind. Stop
possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after him.’
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an
effort. ‘I will.’ Then he shrugged his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After all that’s what this
party business was all about, really: to give away lots of birthday-presents, and somehow make it
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn’t made it any easier in the end, but it would be a pity to
waste all my preparations. It would quite spoil the joke.’
‘Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,’ said Gandalf.
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’ He drew a deep breath. ‘And now I
really must be starting, or somebody else will catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn’t bear to
do it all over again.’ He picked up his bag and moved to the door.
‘You have still got the ring in your pocket,’ said the wizard.
‘Well, so I have!’ cried Bilbo. ‘And my will and all the other documents too. You had better take
it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.’
‘No, don’t give the ring to me,’ said Gandalf. ‘Put it on the mantelpiece. It will be safe enough
there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait for him.’
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by the clock, his hand jerked back,
and the packet fell on the floor. Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it
in its place. A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit’s face again. Suddenly it gave way to a
look of relief and a laugh.
‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off!’
They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from the stand; then he whistled. Three
dwarves came out of different rooms where they had been busy.
‘Is everything ready?’ asked Bilbo. ‘Everything packed and labelled?’
‘Everything,’ they answered.
‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked up, sniffing the air. ‘What
fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have really been longing
for, for years! Good-bye!’ he said, looking at his old home and bowing to the door. ‘Good-bye,
Gandalf!’
‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are old enough, and perhaps wise
enough.’
‘Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am as happy now as I have ever been, and
that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. I am being swept off my feet at last,’ he added, and
then in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he turned away from the lights and voices
in the field and tents, and followed by his three companions went round into his garden, and trotted
down the long sloping path. He jumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom, and took to the
meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the grass.
Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness. ‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo – until
our next meeting!’ he said softly and went back indoors.
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?’
he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’
‘I wish – I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my
heart that he really meant to go. He always used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come back
sooner, just to see him off.’
‘I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘Don’t be too troubled.
He’ll be all right – now. He left a packet for you. There it is!’
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it, but did not open it.
‘You’ll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,’ said the wizard. ‘You are the
master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, you’ll find a golden ring.’
‘The ring!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still, it may be useful.’
‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make use of it, if I were you. But keep it
secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.’
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to the guests. Rumours of
strange events had by now spread all over the field, but Frodo would only say no doubt everything
will be cleared up in the morning. About midnight carriages came for the important folk. One by one
they rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners came by arrangement, and
removed in wheelbarrows those that had inadvertently remained behind.
Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later. Morning went on. People came
and began (by orders) to clear away the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and the spoons and
knives and bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and the crumbs and
cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small
item). Then a number of other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers,
and Tooks, and other guests that lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when even the best-fed were
out and about again, there was a large crowd at Bag End, uninvited but not unexpected.
Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and worried. He welcomed all the
callers, but he had not much more to say than before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: ‘Mr.
Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far as I know, for good.’ Some of the visitors he invited to come
inside, as Bilbo had left ‘messages’ for them.
Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages and parcels and small articles of
furniture. On every item there was a label tied. There were several labels of this sort:
For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo; on an umbrella. Adelard had carried off
many unlabelled ones.
For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence, with love from Bilbo; on a large
waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo’s sister and the eldest surviving female relative of Bilbo and
Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had written reams of good advice for more than half a century.
For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B.; on a gold pen and ink-bottle. Milo
never answered letters.
For ANGELICA’S use, from Uncle Bilbo; on a round convex mirror. She was a young Baggins,
and too obviously considered her face shapely.
For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor; on an (empty) book-case.
Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than usual at returning them.
For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT; on a case of silver spoons. Bilbo
believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons, while he was away on his former journey.
Lobelia knew that quite well. When she arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she
also took the spoons.
This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo’s residence had got rather
cluttered up with things in the course of his long life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered
up: for which the custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of course,
that the birthday-presents were always new; there were one or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that
had circulated all around the district; but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and kept those that he
received. The old hole was now being cleared a little.
Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out personally by Bilbo, and several had
some point, or some joke. But, of course, most of the things were given where they would be wanted
and welcome. The poorer hobbits, and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very well. Old Gaffer
Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for
creaking joints. Old Rory Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen bottles of Old
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down
by Bilbo’s father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him a capital fellow after the first bottle.
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the chief treasures, as well as
the books, pictures, and more than enough furniture, were left in his possession. There was, however,
no sign nor mention of money or jewellery: not a penny-piece or a glass bead was given away.
Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that the whole household was being
distributed free spread like wildfire; and before long the place was packed with people who had no
business there, but could not be kept out. Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off with minor items not
addressed to them, or with anything that seemed unwanted or unwatched. The road to the gate was
blocked with barrows and handcarts.
In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo had retired for a while and
left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo,
Merry bowed politely.
‘He is indisposed,’ he said. ‘He is resting.’
‘Hiding, you mean,’ said Lobelia. ‘Anyway we want to see him and we mean to see him. Just go
and tell him so!’
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover their parting gift of spoons.
It did not improve their tempers. Eventually they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a
table with a lot of papers in front of him. He looked indisposed – to see Sackville-Bagginses at any
rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he spoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering him bad bargain-prices
(as between friends) for various valuable and unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the
things specially directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very fishy.
‘Only one thing is clear to me,’ said Otho, ‘and that is that you are doing exceedingly well out of
it. I insist on seeing the will.’
Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He read the will carefully and
snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits,
which demand among other things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).
‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting sixty years. Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He
snapped his fingers under Frodo’s nose and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A
little later Frodo came out of the study to see how things were going on, and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks and corners, and tapping the floors. He escorted her firmly off the
premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but rather valuable) articles that had somehow
fallen inside her umbrella. Her face looked as if she was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
‘You’ll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go too? You don’t belong here; you’re no
Baggins – you – you’re a Brandybuck!’
‘Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,’ said Frodo as he shut the door on her.
‘It was a compliment,’ said Merry Brandybuck, ‘and so, of course, not true.’
Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (two Boffins and a Bolger) who
were knocking holes in the walls of one of the cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho
Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, where
he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo’s gold excited both curiosity and hope; for
legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows, anyone’s
for the finding – unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s
time to close the shop, Merry,’ he said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if
they bring a battering ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door. ‘Lobelia again most
likely,’ he thought. ‘She must have thought of something really nasty, and have come back again to say
it. It can wait.’
He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder, but he took no notice. Suddenly
the wizard’s head appeared at the window.
‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your hole and out through the
hill,’ he said.
‘My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running out of the room to the door. ‘Come in!
Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.’
‘Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap towards Bywater with a
face that would have curdled new milk.’
‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo’s ring. I longed to
disappear.’
‘Don’t do that!’ said Gandalf, sitting down. ‘Do be careful of that ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly
about that that I have come to say a last word.’
‘Well, what about it?’
‘What do you know already?’
‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and how he used it: on his
journey, I mean.’
‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf.
‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’ said Frodo. ‘He told me the true story soon
after I came to live here. He said you had pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. “No
secrets between us, Frodo,” he said; “but they are not to go any further. It’s mine anyway.” ’
‘That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think of it all?’
‘If you mean, inventing all that about a “present”, well, I thought the true story much more likely,
and I couldn’t see the point of altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I
thought it rather odd.’
‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures – if they use them. Let it
be a warning to you to be very careful with it. It may have other powers than just making you vanish
when you wish to.’
‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo.
‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun to wonder about the ring, especially
since last night. No need to worry. But if you take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all.
At least I beg you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say again: keep it
safe, and keep it secret!’
‘You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?’
‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tell you something when I come back. I
am going off at once: so this is good-bye for the present.’ He got up.
‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying on for at least a week. I was looking
forward to your help.’
‘I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind. I may be away for a good while; but I’ll come
and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan’t often
be visiting the Shire openly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am a
nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away,
or worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his
wealth.’
‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and Lobelia. How abominable! I would give
them Bag End and everything else, if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with
him. I love the Shire. But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever see
him again.’
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things. Goodbye now! Take care of yourself!
Look out for me, especially at unlikely times! Good-bye!’
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked off at a surprising pace;
but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight.
The evening was closing in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not
see him again for a long time.